README.md, before:

# crossplane-diff

A standalone tool for visualizing the differences between Crossplane resources in YAML files and their resulting state
when applied to a live Kubernetes cluster. Similar to `kubectl diff` but with specific enhancements for Crossplane
resources, particularly Composite Resources (XRs) and their composed resources.

## Overview

The `crossplane-diff` tool helps you:

- **Preview changes** before applying Crossplane resources to a cluster
- **Visualize differences** at multiple levels: both the XR itself and all downstream composed resources
- **Analyze composition impact** showing how composition changes affect existing XRs in the cluster
- **Support complex compositions** including functions, requirements, and environment configurations
- **Handle both Crossplane v1 and v2** resource definitions, including namespaced composite resources
- **Detect resources that would be removed** by your changes

## Installation

### Download Pre-built Binary

Download the latest release from the [releases page](https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/crossplane-diff/releases).

### Build from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/crossplane-diff.git
cd crossplane-diff
go build -o crossplane-diff ./cmd/diff
```

## Usage

### XR Diff - Preview Changes to Composite Resources

```bash
# Show changes that would result from applying an XR from a file
crossplane-diff xr xr.yaml

# Show changes from stdin
cat xr.yaml | crossplane-diff xr -

# Process multiple files
crossplane-diff xr xr1.yaml xr2.yaml xr3.yaml

# Show changes in a compact format with minimal context
crossplane-diff xr xr.yaml --compact

# Disable color output
crossplane-diff xr xr.yaml --no-color
```

### Composition Diff - Analyze Impact of Composition Changes

```bash
# Show impact of updated composition on all XRs using it
crossplane-diff comp updated-composition.yaml

# Show impact of multiple composition changes
crossplane-diff comp comp1.yaml comp2.yaml comp3.yaml

# Show impact only on XRs in a specific namespace
crossplane-diff comp updated-composition.yaml -n production

# Include XRs with Manual update policy (pinned revisions)
crossplane-diff comp updated-composition.yaml --include-manual
```

### Command Options

#### `xr` - Diff Composite Resources

```
crossplane-diff xr [<files> ...] [flags]

Arguments:
  [<files> ...]    YAML files containing Crossplane resources to diff.

Flags:
  -h, --help                   Show context-sensitive help.
      --verbose                Print verbose logging statements.
      --no-color               Disable colorized output.
      --compact                Show compact diffs with minimal context.
      --max-nested-depth=10    Maximum depth for nested XR recursion.
      --timeout=1m             How long to run before timing out.
      --qps=0                  Maximum QPS to the API server.
      --burst=0                Maximum burst for throttle.
```

**Note**: XR namespaces are read directly from the YAML files being diffed, not from command-line flags.

#### `comp` - Diff Composition Impact

```
crossplane-diff comp [<files> ...] [flags]

Arguments:
  [<files> ...]    YAML files containing updated Composition(s).

Flags:
  -h, --help                   Show context-sensitive help.
      --verbose                Print verbose logging statements.
      --no-color               Disable colorized output.
      --compact                Show compact diffs with minimal context.
      --max-nested-depth=10    Maximum depth for nested XR recursion.
      --timeout=1m             How long to run before timing out.
      --qps=0                  Maximum QPS to the API server.
      --burst=0                Maximum burst for throttle.
  -n, --namespace=""           Namespace to find XRs (empty = all namespaces).
      --include-manual         Include XRs with Manual update policy (default:
                               only Automatic policy XRs)
```

**Note**: The `diff` subcommand is deprecated. Use `xr` instead.

### Prerequisites

- A running Kubernetes cluster with Crossplane installed
- `kubectl` configured to access your cluster
- Appropriate RBAC permissions (see [Required Permissions](#required-permissions))

## How It Works

The tool performs the following steps:

1. **Load resources** from YAML files or stdin
2. **Find matching compositions** for each Composite Resource
3. **Render resources** using the same composition pipeline as Crossplane
4. **Resolve requirements** iteratively (environment configs, external resources)
5. **Propagate namespaces** from XRs to managed resources (for Crossplane v2)
6. **Validate resources** against their schemas and enforce scope constraints
7. **Calculate diffs** by comparing rendered resources against current cluster state
8. **Display formatted output** showing what would change

## Crossplane v2 Support

This tool fully supports both Crossplane v1 and v2, including:

- **Cluster-scoped XRDs**: Traditional cluster-wide resources
- **Namespaced XRDs**: Resources confined to specific namespaces for better isolation
- **Automatic scope detection**: Determines whether XRDs are cluster or namespace scoped
- **Namespace propagation**: Ensures managed resources inherit appropriate namespaces
- **Scope validation**: Enforces rules like "namespaced XRs cannot own cluster-scoped managed resources"

**Note**: Namespace information is read directly from the XR definitions in your YAML files, not from command-line
flags.

## Required Permissions

The tool requires read access to:

- **Crossplane definitions**: XRDs, Compositions, Functions
- **Crossplane runtime resources**: XRs, Claims, Managed Resources
- **Crossplane configuration**: EnvironmentConfigs
- **Kubernetes resources**: CRDs, referenced resources
- **Resource hierarchies**: Owner references and relationships

## Output Format

The output follows familiar diff conventions with colorized output (unless disabled):

```diff
+++ Resource/new-resource-(generated)
+ apiVersion: nop.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
+ kind: NopResource
+ metadata:
+   name: new-resource
+ spec:
+   forProvider:
+     field: value

---
--- XNopResource/removed-resource
- apiVersion: diff.example.org/v1alpha1
- kind: XNopResource
- spec:
-   coolField: goodbye!

~~~
~~~ Resource/modified-resource
  metadata:
    name: modified-resource
- spec:
-   oldValue: something
+ spec:
+   newValue: something-else
---

Summary: 1 added, 1 modified, 1 removed
```

## Guiding Principles

The tool prioritizes **accuracy above all else**:

- Never silently continues in the face of failures
- Avoids making best-guesses that could compromise accuracy
- Fails completely rather than emit potentially incorrect partial results
- Reaches extensively into the cluster for all information needed to produce accurate diffs
- Caches resources only to avoid API throttling

### Caveats

The tool does not take a snapshot of cluster state before processing, so changes made to the cluster during execution
may affect results. 

## Documentation

- **[Design Document](design/design-doc-cli-diff.md)**: Comprehensive technical design and architecture
- **[CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md)**: Instructions for Claude.  Contains development principles and guidelines for LLMs.

## Development

### Local Development Setup

**Prerequisites:**
- Go 1.24+
- Docker
- Earthly ([install instructions](https://earthly.dev/get-earthly))
- kubectl

**Setup Steps:**

1. **Install required tools:**
   ```bash
   go install sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/tools/setup-envtest@release-0.20
   setup-envtest use 1.30.3 # or whatever cluster version we're using now
   ```

2. **Generate test manifests:**
   ```bash
   earthly +go-generate --CROSSPLANE_IMAGE_TAG=main
   ```

3. **Build the project:**
   ```bash
   earthly +build
   ```

### Running Tests

**Unit and Integration Tests (fast):**
```bash
cd cmd/diff
go test ./...
```

**Development Checks (linting, tests, generation):**
```bash
# Run before opening any PR
earthly +reviewable
```

**End-to-End Tests:**
```bash
# Full test matrix against multiple Crossplane versions (slower)
earthly -P +e2e-matrix

# Single E2E test against specific version
earthly +e2e --CROSSPLANE_IMAGE_TAG=main
```

### Build and Development Commands

```bash
# Build binary
earthly +build

# Run linting
earthly +lint

# Generate code/manifests
earthly +generate

# All available targets
earthly --help
```

### Architecture

The tool follows a clean layered architecture:

- **Command Layer**: CLI argument parsing and coordination
- **Application Layer**: Process orchestration and resource loading
- **Domain Layer**: Core diff logic, rendering, and validation
- **Client Layer**: Kubernetes and Crossplane API interactions

### Testing

The project includes comprehensive testing:

- **Unit tests**: Fast, isolated component testing
- **Integration tests**: Using `envtest` for realistic cluster interactions
- **E2E tests**: Full end-to-end scenarios across v1, v2-cluster, and v2-namespaced configurations

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see our [contributing guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for detailed setup instructions and development workflow.

**Quick Start for Contributors:**

1. Fork and clone the repository
2. Run setup: `earthly +go-generate --CROSSPLANE_IMAGE_TAG=main`
3. Make your changes
4. Test your changes: `earthly +reviewable && earthly -P +e2e-matrix`
5. Open a pull request

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for complete guidelines and [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) for community standards.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

feat(install): update the install script to get the correct binaries
Signed-off-by: Christopher Haar <christopher.haar@upbound.io>

README.md, after:

# crossplane-diff

A standalone tool for visualizing the differences between Crossplane resources in YAML files and their resulting state
when applied to a live Kubernetes cluster. Similar to `kubectl diff` but with specific enhancements for Crossplane
resources, particularly Composite Resources (XRs) and their composed resources.

## Overview

The `crossplane-diff` tool helps you:

- **Preview changes** before applying Crossplane resources to a cluster
- **Visualize differences** at multiple levels: both the XR itself and all downstream composed resources
- **Analyze composition impact** showing how composition changes affect existing XRs in the cluster
- **Support complex compositions** including functions, requirements, and environment configurations
- **Handle both Crossplane v1 and v2** resource definitions, including namespaced composite resources
- **Detect resources that would be removed** by your changes

## Installation

### Installing the CLI

You can install the latest version of **crossplane-diff** automatically using the provided install script:

```bash
curl -sL "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/crossplane-contrib/crossplane-diff/main/install.sh" | sh
```

The script detects your operating system and CPU architecture and downloads the latest release from GitHub.

### Installing the CLI with a specific Version

You can set the VERSION environment variable before running the script:

```bash
curl -sL "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/crossplane-contrib/crossplane-diff/main/install.sh" | VERSION=v0.3.1 sh
```

### Building the CLI

```bash
git clone https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/crossplane-diff.git
cd crossplane-diff
earthly -P +build
```

## Usage

### XR Diff - Preview Changes to Composite Resources

```bash
# Show changes that would result from applying an XR from a file
crossplane-diff xr xr.yaml

# Show changes from stdin
cat xr.yaml | crossplane-diff xr -

# Process multiple files
crossplane-diff xr xr1.yaml xr2.yaml xr3.yaml

# Show changes in a compact format with minimal context
crossplane-diff xr xr.yaml --compact

# Disable color output
crossplane-diff xr xr.yaml --no-color
```

### Composition Diff - Analyze Impact of Composition Changes

```bash
# Show impact of updated composition on all XRs using it
crossplane-diff comp updated-composition.yaml

# Show impact of multiple composition changes
crossplane-diff comp comp1.yaml comp2.yaml comp3.yaml

# Show impact only on XRs in a specific namespace
crossplane-diff comp updated-composition.yaml -n production

# Include XRs with Manual update policy (pinned revisions)
crossplane-diff comp updated-composition.yaml --include-manual
```

### Command Options

#### `xr` - Diff Composite Resources

```
crossplane-diff xr [<files> ...] [flags]

Arguments:
  [<files> ...]    YAML files containing Crossplane resources to diff.

Flags:
  -h, --help                   Show context-sensitive help.
      --verbose                Print verbose logging statements.
      --no-color               Disable colorized output.
      --compact                Show compact diffs with minimal context.
      --max-nested-depth=10    Maximum depth for nested XR recursion.
      --timeout=1m             How long to run before timing out.
      --qps=0                  Maximum QPS to the API server.
      --burst=0                Maximum burst for throttle.
```

**Note**: XR namespaces are read directly from the YAML files being diffed, not from command-line flags.

#### `comp` - Diff Composition Impact

```
crossplane-diff comp [<files> ...] [flags]

Arguments:
  [<files> ...]    YAML files containing updated Composition(s).

Flags:
  -h, --help                   Show context-sensitive help.
      --verbose                Print verbose logging statements.
      --no-color               Disable colorized output.
      --compact                Show compact diffs with minimal context.
      --max-nested-depth=10    Maximum depth for nested XR recursion.
      --timeout=1m             How long to run before timing out.
      --qps=0                  Maximum QPS to the API server.
      --burst=0                Maximum burst for throttle.
  -n, --namespace=""           Namespace to find XRs (empty = all namespaces).
      --include-manual         Include XRs with Manual update policy (default:
                               only Automatic policy XRs)
```

**Note**: The `diff` subcommand is deprecated. Use `xr` instead.

### Prerequisites

- A running Kubernetes cluster with Crossplane installed
- `kubectl` configured to access your cluster
- Appropriate RBAC permissions (see [Required Permissions](#required-permissions))

## How It Works

The tool performs the following steps:

1. **Load resources** from YAML files or stdin
2. **Find matching compositions** for each Composite Resource
3. **Render resources** using the same composition pipeline as Crossplane
4. **Resolve requirements** iteratively (environment configs, external resources)
5. **Propagate namespaces** from XRs to managed resources (for Crossplane v2)
6. **Validate resources** against their schemas and enforce scope constraints
7. **Calculate diffs** by comparing rendered resources against current cluster state
8. **Display formatted output** showing what would change

## Crossplane v2 Support

This tool fully supports both Crossplane v1 and v2, including:

- **Cluster-scoped XRDs**: Traditional cluster-wide resources
- **Namespaced XRDs**: Resources confined to specific namespaces for better isolation
- **Automatic scope detection**: Determines whether XRDs are cluster or namespace scoped
- **Namespace propagation**: Ensures managed resources inherit appropriate namespaces
- **Scope validation**: Enforces rules like "namespaced XRs cannot own cluster-scoped managed resources"

**Note**: Namespace information is read directly from the XR definitions in your YAML files, not from command-line
flags.

## Required Permissions

The tool requires read access to:

- **Crossplane definitions**: XRDs, Compositions, Functions
- **Crossplane runtime resources**: XRs, Claims, Managed Resources
- **Crossplane configuration**: EnvironmentConfigs
- **Kubernetes resources**: CRDs, referenced resources
- **Resource hierarchies**: Owner references and relationships

## Output Format

The output follows familiar diff conventions with colorized output (unless disabled):

```diff
+++ Resource/new-resource-(generated)
+ apiVersion: nop.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
+ kind: NopResource
+ metadata:
+   name: new-resource
+ spec:
+   forProvider:
+     field: value

---
--- XNopResource/removed-resource
- apiVersion: diff.example.org/v1alpha1
- kind: XNopResource
- spec:
-   coolField: goodbye!

~~~
~~~ Resource/modified-resource
  metadata:
    name: modified-resource
- spec:
-   oldValue: something
+ spec:
+   newValue: something-else
---

Summary: 1 added, 1 modified, 1 removed
```

## Guiding Principles

The tool prioritizes **accuracy above all else**:

- Never silently continues in the face of failures
- Avoids making best-guesses that could compromise accuracy
- Fails completely rather than emit potentially incorrect partial results
- Reaches extensively into the cluster for all information needed to produce accurate diffs
- Caches resources only to avoid API throttling

### Caveats

The tool does not take a snapshot of cluster state before processing, so changes made to the cluster during execution
may affect results.

## Documentation

- **[Design Document](design/design-doc-cli-diff.md)**: Comprehensive technical design and architecture
- **[CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md)**: Instructions for Claude.  Contains development principles and guidelines for LLMs.

## Development

### Local Development Setup

**Prerequisites:**
- Go 1.24+
- Docker
- Earthly ([install instructions](https://earthly.dev/get-earthly))
- kubectl

**Setup Steps:**

1. **Install required tools:**
   ```bash
   go install sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/tools/setup-envtest@release-0.20
   setup-envtest use 1.30.3 # or whatever cluster version we're using now
   ```

2. **Generate test manifests:**
   ```bash
   earthly +go-generate --CROSSPLANE_IMAGE_TAG=main
   ```

3. **Build the project:**
   ```bash
   earthly +build
   ```

### Running Tests

**Unit and Integration Tests (fast):**
```bash
cd cmd/diff
go test ./...
```

**Development Checks (linting, tests, generation):**
```bash
# Run before opening any PR
earthly +reviewable
```

**End-to-End Tests:**
```bash
# Full test matrix against multiple Crossplane versions (slower)
earthly -P +e2e-matrix

# Single E2E test against specific version
earthly +e2e --CROSSPLANE_IMAGE_TAG=main
```

### Build and Development Commands

```bash
# Build binary
earthly +build

# Run linting
earthly +lint

# Generate code/manifests
earthly +generate

# All available targets
earthly --help
```

### Architecture

The tool follows a clean layered architecture:

- **Command Layer**: CLI argument parsing and coordination
- **Application Layer**: Process orchestration and resource loading
- **Domain Layer**: Core diff logic, rendering, and validation
- **Client Layer**: Kubernetes and Crossplane API interactions

### Testing

The project includes comprehensive testing:

- **Unit tests**: Fast, isolated component testing
- **Integration tests**: Using `envtest` for realistic cluster interactions
- **E2E tests**: Full end-to-end scenarios across v1, v2-cluster, and v2-namespaced configurations

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see our [contributing guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for detailed setup instructions and development workflow.

**Quick Start for Contributors:**

1. Fork and clone the repository
2. Run setup: `earthly +go-generate --CROSSPLANE_IMAGE_TAG=main`
3. Make your changes
4. Test your changes: `earthly +reviewable && earthly -P +e2e-matrix`
5. Open a pull request

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for complete guidelines and [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) for community standards.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
