test/e2e/README.md, before:

# Crossplane End-to-end Tests

This directory contains Crossplane's E2E tests. These tests exercise Crossplane
features by:

1. Creating a `kind` cluster.
1. Deploying Crossplane, using its Helm chart.
1. Applying a series of YAML manifests.
1. Testing whether the resulting resources work as expected.

These tests focus on core Crossplane features - i.e. the package manager,
Composition, etc. They should not take dependencies on 'real' Crossplane
providers or external systems. Instead they use 'fake' providers like
`provider-nop` and `provider-dummy`.

All Crossplane features must be exercised by these tests, as well as unit tests.

## Running Tests

Run `earthly -P +e2e` to run E2E tests.

This compiles Crossplane and an E2E test binary. It then uses the test binary to
run the base test suite. Use the `FLAGS` to pass flags to the test binary. For
example:

```shell
# Some functions that setup the test environment (e.g. kind) use the klog logger
# The -v flag controls the verbosity of klog. Use -v=4 for debug logging.
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-v=4"

# To run only a specific test, match it by regular expression
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.run ^TestConfiguration"

# To test features with certain labels, use the labels flag
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-labels area=apiextensions"

# To test a specific feature, use the feature flag
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-feature=ConfigurationWithDependency"

# Stop immediately on first test failure, and leave the kind cluster to debug.
earthly -i -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.failfast -fail-fast -destroy-kind-cluster=false"

# Run a specific test suite.
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.v -test-suite=composition-webhook-schema-validation"
```

### Accessing the Test Cluster

Earthly runs e2e tests in a buildkit container, which is not directly accessible
from host via regular `docker ps` and `docker exec` commands. To access the
cluster, you can use the following commands:

0. Make sure you have started the tests with the `-i` flag. For example:

```bash
earthly -i -P +e2e --FLAGS="-v=4"
```

1. Get the container ID of the buildkit container
```bash
$ docker ps | grep earthly/buildkitd
$ export EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID=<container_id>
```

2. Find the id of the runc container running in earthly
```bash
$ docker exec $EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID buildkit-runc list
# Export the container id of the runc container
$ export RUNC_CONTAINER_ID=<container_id>
```

In case you have only one earthly job running, you can use the following
shortcut to get the runc container id:

```bash
$ export RUNC_CONTAINER_ID=$(docker exec $EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID buildkit-runc list -q)
```

3. Exec into the runc container and access the cluster

```bash
# Exec into the runc container
$ docker exec -ti $EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID buildkit-runc exec -t $RUNC_CONTAINER_ID sh
# See the kind cluster
$ kind get clusters
crossplane-e2e-7eda80e167ed36325
# Install kubectl
$ apk add kubectl
# Now you can use kubectl to access the cluster
```

### Test Logging

The E2E tests are run using [`gotestsum`] that helps output the test results in
a format that integrates easily with CI systems. The downside though is that
test logging statements, like `t.Logf("foo")`, are not streamed in real time and
they are only included in the output if there is a failure.

To change this behavior when running the E2E tests locally, you can update the
`Earthfile` to call `gotestsum` with a format like `--format standard-verbose`
instead, for example:

```Dockerfile
RUN gotestsum --no-color=false --format standard-verbose ...
```

### Running Tests Directly

The E2E tests are typically run via `earthly` for convenience and consistency.
However, this introduces additional layers that can make it challenging to debug
issues (see [Accessing the Test Cluster](#accessing-the-test-cluster) above). An
alternative is to run the tests more directly by basically manually running a
couple critical commands that `earthly` would normally run for you inside of its
build container.

First compile the E2E test binary:
```shell
go test -c -o e2e ./test/e2e
```

Then run the `e2e` test binary, passing your specific flags and specific tests
you want to execute if desired:
```shell
./e2e -v=4 -test.v -test.failfast -fail-fast -destroy-kind-cluster=false -test.run ^TestPropagateFieldsRemovalToXRAfterUpgrade
```

Note the command above doesn't clean up the `kind` cluster when finished, so
you'll need to manually delete it when you're done.

## Test Parallelism

`earthly -P +e2e` runs all defined E2E tests serially. Tests do not run in
parallel. This is because all tests run against the same API server and
Crossplane has a lot of cluster-scoped state - XRDs, Providers, Compositions,
etc. It's easier and less error-prone to write tests when you don't have to
worry about one test potentially conflicting with another - for example by
installing the same provider another test would install.

The [CI GitHub workflow] uses a matrix strategy to run multiple jobs in parallel,
each running a test suite, see the dedicated section for more details.

We are currently splitting the tests to be able to run all basic tests against
the default installation of Crossplane, and for each alpha feature covered we
run all basic tests plus the feature specific ones against a Crossplane
installation with the feature enabled.

In the future we could think of improving parallelism by, for example, adding
the area to the matrix or spinning multiple kind clusters for each job.

## Test Suite

In order to be able to run specific subsets of tests, we introduced the concept
of test suites. To run a specific test suite use the `-test-suite` flag.

A test suite is currently defined by:
- A key to be used as value of the `-test-suite` flag.
- A set of labels that will be used to filter the tests to run, which will be
  added to the user-provided ones, preserving the latter ones in case of key
  conflicts.
- A list of Helm install options defining the initial Crossplane installation
  for the given test suite, which will be used to install Crossplane before
  running the tests. E.g. adding flags to enable alpha features and feature
  specific flags.
- A list of additional setup steps to be run before installing Crossplane and
  running the tests. E.g. Loading additional images into the cluster.
- Whether the suite should include the default suite or not, meaning that
  install options will be added to the default ones if not explicitly specified
  not to do so.

Test suites enable use cases such as installing Crossplane with a specific
alpha feature enabled and running all the basic tests, plus the ones specific to
that feature, to make sure the feature is not breaking any default behavior.

In case a test needs a specific Crossplane configuration, it must still take
care of upgrading the installation to the desired configuration, but should then
use `environment.GetSelectedSuiteInstallOpts` to retrieve at runtime the baseline
installation options to be sure to restore the previous state. This allows tests
to run against any suite if needed.

Test suites can be combined with labels to run a subset of tests, e.g.
splitting by area, or with the usual Go `-run <regexp>` flag to run only
specific tests, in such case, suite labels will be ignored altogether.

## Adding a Test

> We're still learning what the best way to arrange E2E tests is. It's okay for
> this pattern to change if it's not working well, but please discuss first!

We try to follow this pattern when adding a new test:

1. Define a single feature per Test function, if possible.
1. Setup a directory of plain YAML manifests per test - i.e. test fixtures - at
   `e2e/manifests/<area>/<test>`, usually with a `setup` sub-folder
   containing resources to be deployed at setup phase and cleaned up during the
   teardown. Try to avoid reusing other feature's fixtures, as this would introduce
   hidden dependencies between tests.
1. Try reusing existing helpers as much as possible, see package
   `github.com/crossplane/crossplane/test/e2e/funcs`, or add new ones there if
   needed.
1. Prefer using the Fluent APIs to define features
   (`features.NewWithDescription(...).WithSetup(...).AssessWithDescription(...).WithTeardown(...).Feature()`).
   1. `features.Table` should be used only to define multiple self-contained
      assessments to be run sequentially, but without assuming any ordering among
      them, similarly to the usual table driven style we adopt for unit testing.
1. Prefer the usage of `WithSetup` and `WithTeardown` to their unnamed
   counterparts (`Setup` and `Teardown`) to define the setup and teardown phases of
   a feature, as they allow to provide a description.
1. Use short but explicative `CamelCase` sentences as descriptions for
   everything used to define the name of tests/subtests, e.g.
   `features.NewWithDescription("CrossplaneUpgrade", ...)` `WithSetup("InstallProviderNop",
   ...)`, `AssessWithDescription("ProviderNopIsInstalled", ...)`,
   `WithTeardown("UninstallProviderNop", ...)`.
1. Use the `Setup` and `Teardown` phases to define respectively actions that are
   not strictly part of the feature being tested, but are needed to make it
   work, and actions that are needed to clean up the environment after the test
   has run.
1. Use `Assess` steps to define the steps required to exercise the actual
   feature at hand.
1. Use `Assess` steps to define both conditions that should hold and actions that
   should be performed. In the former case use active descriptions, e.g.
   `InstallProviderNop`, while in the latter use passive descriptions, e.g.
   `ProviderNopIsInstalled`.
1. Try to group actions and the checks of what you have done `Assess` step in a
   single step with an active description if possible, to avoid having twice the
   steps and making it explicit that we are checking the action executed by the
   previous function. e.g. `"UpgradeProvider"` should both upgrade the provider
   and check that it  becomes healthy within a reasonable time.
1. Avoid using the available context to pass data between steps, as it makes it
   harder to understand the flow of the test and could lead to data races if not
   handled properly.
1. Keep in mind that all `Setup` and `Teardown` steps, wherever are defined are
   always going to be executed respectively before and after all the `Assess`
   steps defined, so you can define `Teardowns` immediately after the step that defined the
   resource to be deleted as a sort of `defer` statement. Same applies to `Setup`
   steps which could actually be located immediately before the step requiring
   them. But be careful with this, as a non-linear narrative is going to be easier
   to follow, so if possible stick to all Setups at the beginning and all Teardowns
   at the end of the feature.
1. Features can be assigned labels, to allow dicing and slicing the test suite,
   see below for more details about available labels, but overall try to define
   all the labels that could be useful to select the test in the future and make
   sure it's actually being selected when run in CI.

Here an example of a test following the above guidelines:

```go
package e2e

import "sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework/pkg/features"

// ...

// TestSomeFeature ...
func TestSomeFeature(t *testing.T) {
   manifests := "test/e2e/manifests/pkg/some-area/some-feature"
   namespace := "some-namespace"
   // ... other variables or constants ...

   environment.Test(t,
      features.NewWithDescription(t.Name(), ...).
         WithLabel(LabelArea, ...).
         WithLabel(LabelSize, ...).
         WithLabel(config.LabelTestSuite, config.TestSuiteDefault).
         // ...
         WithSetup("ReadyPrerequisites", ...).
         // ... other setup steps ...
         AssessWithDescription("DoSomething", ...).
         AssessWithDescription("SomethingElseIsInSomeState", ...).
         // ... other assess steps ...
         WithTeardown("DeleteCreatedResources", ...).
         // ... other teardown steps ...
         Feature(),
   )
}

// ...
```

### Features' Labels

Features are grouped into broad feature areas - e.g. `TestComposition` in
`composition_test.go`. Features pertaining to Composition should be added to
`TestComposition`.

Some tests may involve updating an existing test - for example you might test a
new kind of transform by updating the `composition/patch-and-transform`
manifests and adding a new assessment or two to the `pandt` `features.Table`.

Other, larger tests may involve creating a new directory of manifests and a new
`features.Table`. Every `features.Table` must be passed to `environment.Test` to
be run.

When you pass a feature to `environment.Test` you can add arbitrary labels that
may be used to filter which tests are run. Common labels include:

* `area`: The area of Crossplane being tested - `pkg`, `apiextensions`, etc.
* `size`: `small` if the test completes in under a minute, otherwise `large`.

If you add a new `area` label, be sure to add it to the matrix strategy of the
e2e-tests job in the [CI GitHub workflow]. We run E2E tests for each area
of Crossplane in parallel.

When adding a test:

* Use commentary to explain what your tests should do.
* Use brief `CamelCase` test names, not descriptive sentences.
* Avoid adding complex logic in the `e2e` package.
* Implement new test logic as a `features.Func` in the `e2e/funcs` package.

## Design Principals

The goals of these tests are to:

* Simulate real-world use to exercise all of Crossplane's functionality.
* Run reliably, with no flaky tests.
* Converge on requiring mostly updated manifests - and little Go - to add tests.
* Use tools and patterns that are familiar and unsurprising to contributors.

The following design principals help achieve these goals:

* Use familiar Kubernetes YAML manifests as test fixtures.
* Provide a library of reusable test functions (e.g. `funcs.ResourcesCreatedIn`).
* Remain as close to idiomatic Go stdlib [`testing`] tests as possible.
* Use common, idiomatic Kubernetes ecosystem tooling - [`e2e-framework`].
* Implement as much _logic_ in Go as possible - avoid scripts or shelling out.

Refer to the [E2E one-pager] for more context.

[CI GitHub workflow]: ../../.github/workflows/ci.yml
[`testing`]: https://pkg.go.dev/testing
[`e2e-framework`]: https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework
[E2e one-pager]: ../../design/one-pager-e2e-tests.md
[`gotestsum`]: https://github.com/gotestyourself/gotestsum

Commit message:

fix: pass observed resources into render (#124)
* fix: pass observed resources into render

Signed-off-by: Jonathan Ogilvie <jonathan.ogilvie@sumologic.com>

# Conflicts:
#	test/e2e/diff_test.go

* fix:  add tests for observed resources; lint

Signed-off-by: Jonathan Ogilvie <jonathan.ogilvie@sumologic.com>

* fix: fix test for observed resources

Signed-off-by: Jonathan Ogilvie <jonathan.ogilvie@sumologic.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Jonathan Ogilvie <jonathan.ogilvie@sumologic.com>

test/e2e/README.md, after:

# Crossplane End-to-end Tests

This directory contains Crossplane's E2E tests. These tests exercise Crossplane
features by:

1. Creating a `kind` cluster.
1. Deploying Crossplane, using its Helm chart.
1. Applying a series of YAML manifests.
1. Testing whether the resulting resources work as expected.

These tests focus on core Crossplane features - i.e. the package manager,
Composition, etc. They should not take dependencies on 'real' Crossplane
providers or external systems. Instead they use 'fake' providers like
`provider-nop` and `provider-dummy`.

All Crossplane features must be exercised by these tests, as well as unit tests.

## Running Tests

Run `earthly -P +e2e` to run E2E tests.

This compiles Crossplane and an E2E test binary. It then uses the test binary to
run the base test suite. Use the `FLAGS` to pass flags to the test binary. For
example:

```shell
# Some functions that setup the test environment (e.g. kind) use the klog logger
# The -v flag controls the verbosity of klog. Use -v=4 for debug logging.
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-v=4"

# To run only a specific test, match it by regular expression
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.run ^TestConfiguration"

# To test features with certain labels, use the labels flag
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-labels area=apiextensions"

# To test a specific feature, use the feature flag
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-feature=ConfigurationWithDependency"

# Stop immediately on first test failure, and leave the kind cluster to debug.
earthly -i -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.failfast -fail-fast -destroy-kind-cluster=false"

# Run a specific test suite.
earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.v -test-suite=composition-webhook-schema-validation"
```

### Generating Expected Output Files

When adding or updating tests that compare command output against expected files, you can use the `E2E_DUMP_EXPECTED` environment variable to automatically generate or update the expected output files:

```shell
# Generate expected output files for all tests
E2E_DUMP_EXPECTED=1 go test -v ./test/e2e -run TestYourSpecificTest

# Or with earthly (requires modifying Earthfile to pass the env var)
E2E_DUMP_EXPECTED=1 earthly -P +e2e --FLAGS="-test.run TestYourSpecificTest"
```

When `E2E_DUMP_EXPECTED` is set:
- Commands run **without** `--verbose` mode to produce clean output
- The actual output is normalized using the existing regex patterns (to replace dynamic values like resource hashes)
- The normalized output is written to the expected file path
- No assertions are performed (the test will pass after writing the file)

After generating the expected files:
1. Review the generated files to ensure they look correct
2. Unset `E2E_DUMP_EXPECTED` and run the tests again to verify they pass
3. Commit the new/updated expected files

**Important**: Always review generated expected files before committing them, as they become the source of truth for test assertions.

### Accessing the Test Cluster

Earthly runs e2e tests in a buildkit container, which is not directly accessible
from host via regular `docker ps` and `docker exec` commands. To access the
cluster, you can use the following commands:

0. Make sure you have started the tests with the `-i` flag. For example:

```bash
earthly -i -P +e2e --FLAGS="-v=4"
```

1. Get the container ID of the buildkit container
```bash
$ docker ps | grep earthly/buildkitd
$ export EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID=<container_id>
```

2. Find the id of the runc container running in earthly
```bash
$ docker exec $EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID buildkit-runc list
# Export the container id of the runc container
$ export RUNC_CONTAINER_ID=<container_id>
```

In case you have only one earthly job running, you can use the following
shortcut to get the runc container id:

```bash
$ export RUNC_CONTAINER_ID=$(docker exec $EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID buildkit-runc list -q)
```

3. Exec into the runc container and access the cluster

```bash
# Exec into the runc container
$ docker exec -ti $EARTHLY_CONTAINER_ID buildkit-runc exec -t $RUNC_CONTAINER_ID sh
# See the kind cluster
$ kind get clusters
crossplane-e2e-7eda80e167ed36325
# Install kubectl
$ apk add kubectl
# Now you can use kubectl to access the cluster
```

### Test Logging

The E2E tests are run using [`gotestsum`] that helps output the test results in
a format that integrates easily with CI systems. The downside though is that
test logging statements, like `t.Logf("foo")`, are not streamed in real time and
they are only included in the output if there is a failure.

To change this behavior when running the E2E tests locally, you can update the
`Earthfile` to call `gotestsum` with a format like `--format standard-verbose`
instead, for example:

```Dockerfile
RUN gotestsum --no-color=false --format standard-verbose ...
```

### Running Tests Directly

The E2E tests are typically run via `earthly` for convenience and consistency.
However, this introduces additional layers that can make it challenging to debug
issues (see [Accessing the Test Cluster](#accessing-the-test-cluster) above). An
alternative is to run the tests more directly by basically manually running a
couple critical commands that `earthly` would normally run for you inside of its
build container.

First compile the E2E test binary:
```shell
go test -c -o e2e ./test/e2e
```

Then run the `e2e` test binary, passing your specific flags and specific tests
you want to execute if desired:
```shell
./e2e -v=4 -test.v -test.failfast -fail-fast -destroy-kind-cluster=false -test.run ^TestPropagateFieldsRemovalToXRAfterUpgrade
```

Note the command above doesn't clean up the `kind` cluster when finished, so
you'll need to manually delete it when you're done.

## Test Parallelism

`earthly -P +e2e` runs all defined E2E tests serially. Tests do not run in
parallel. This is because all tests run against the same API server and
Crossplane has a lot of cluster-scoped state - XRDs, Providers, Compositions,
etc. It's easier and less error-prone to write tests when you don't have to
worry about one test potentially conflicting with another - for example by
installing the same provider another test would install.

The [CI GitHub workflow] uses a matrix strategy to run multiple jobs in parallel,
each running a test suite, see the dedicated section for more details.

We are currently splitting the tests to be able to run all basic tests against
the default installation of Crossplane, and for each alpha feature covered we
run all basic tests plus the feature specific ones against a Crossplane
installation with the feature enabled.

In the future we could think of improving parallelism by, for example, adding
the area to the matrix or spinning multiple kind clusters for each job.

## Test Suite

In order to be able to run specific subsets of tests, we introduced the concept
of test suites. To run a specific test suite use the `-test-suite` flag.

A test suite is currently defined by:
- A key to be used as value of the `-test-suite` flag.
- A set of labels that will be used to filter the tests to run, which will be
  added to the user-provided ones, preserving the latter ones in case of key
  conflicts.
- A list of Helm install options defining the initial Crossplane installation
  for the given test suite, which will be used to install Crossplane before
  running the tests. E.g. adding flags to enable alpha features and feature
  specific flags.
- A list of additional setup steps to be run before installing Crossplane and
  running the tests. E.g. Loading additional images into the cluster.
- Whether the suite should include the default suite or not, meaning that
  install options will be added to the default ones if not explicitly specified
  not to do so.

Test suites enable use cases such as installing Crossplane with a specific
alpha feature enabled and running all the basic tests, plus the ones specific to
that feature, to make sure the feature is not breaking any default behavior.

In case a test needs a specific Crossplane configuration, it must still take
care of upgrading the installation to the desired configuration, but should then
use `environment.GetSelectedSuiteInstallOpts` to retrieve at runtime the baseline
installation options to be sure to restore the previous state. This allows tests
to run against any suite if needed.

Test suites can be combined with labels to run a subset of tests, e.g.
splitting by area, or with the usual Go `-run <regexp>` flag to run only
specific tests, in such case, suite labels will be ignored altogether.

## Adding a Test

> We're still learning what the best way to arrange E2E tests is. It's okay for
> this pattern to change if it's not working well, but please discuss first!

We try to follow this pattern when adding a new test:

1. Define a single feature per Test function, if possible.
1. Setup a directory of plain YAML manifests per test - i.e. test fixtures - at
   `e2e/manifests/<area>/<test>`, usually with a `setup` sub-folder
   containing resources to be deployed at setup phase and cleaned up during the
   teardown. Try to avoid reusing other feature's fixtures, as this would introduce
   hidden dependencies between tests.
1. Try reusing existing helpers as much as possible, see package
   `github.com/crossplane/crossplane/test/e2e/funcs`, or add new ones there if
   needed.
1. Prefer using the Fluent APIs to define features
   (`features.NewWithDescription(...).WithSetup(...).AssessWithDescription(...).WithTeardown(...).Feature()`).
   1. `features.Table` should be used only to define multiple self-contained
      assessments to be run sequentially, but without assuming any ordering among
      them, similarly to the usual table driven style we adopt for unit testing.
1. Prefer the usage of `WithSetup` and `WithTeardown` to their unnamed
   counterparts (`Setup` and `Teardown`) to define the setup and teardown phases of
   a feature, as they allow to provide a description.
1. Use short but explicative `CamelCase` sentences as descriptions for
   everything used to define the name of tests/subtests, e.g.
   `features.NewWithDescription("CrossplaneUpgrade", ...)` `WithSetup("InstallProviderNop",
   ...)`, `AssessWithDescription("ProviderNopIsInstalled", ...)`,
   `WithTeardown("UninstallProviderNop", ...)`.
1. Use the `Setup` and `Teardown` phases to define respectively actions that are
   not strictly part of the feature being tested, but are needed to make it
   work, and actions that are needed to clean up the environment after the test
   has run.
1. Use `Assess` steps to define the steps required to exercise the actual
   feature at hand.
1. Use `Assess` steps to define both conditions that should hold and actions that
   should be performed. In the former case use active descriptions, e.g.
   `InstallProviderNop`, while in the latter use passive descriptions, e.g.
   `ProviderNopIsInstalled`.
1. Try to group actions and the checks of what you have done `Assess` step in a
   single step with an active description if possible, to avoid having twice the
   steps and making it explicit that we are checking the action executed by the
   previous function. e.g. `"UpgradeProvider"` should both upgrade the provider
   and check that it  becomes healthy within a reasonable time.
1. Avoid using the available context to pass data between steps, as it makes it
   harder to understand the flow of the test and could lead to data races if not
   handled properly.
1. Keep in mind that all `Setup` and `Teardown` steps, wherever are defined are
   always going to be executed respectively before and after all the `Assess`
   steps defined, so you can define `Teardowns` immediately after the step that defined the
   resource to be deleted as a sort of `defer` statement. Same applies to `Setup`
   steps which could actually be located immediately before the step requiring
   them. But be careful with this, as a non-linear narrative is going to be easier
   to follow, so if possible stick to all Setups at the beginning and all Teardowns
   at the end of the feature.
1. Features can be assigned labels, to allow dicing and slicing the test suite,
   see below for more details about available labels, but overall try to define
   all the labels that could be useful to select the test in the future and make
   sure it's actually being selected when run in CI.

Here an example of a test following the above guidelines:

```go
package e2e

import "sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework/pkg/features"

// ...

// TestSomeFeature ...
func TestSomeFeature(t *testing.T) {
   manifests := "test/e2e/manifests/pkg/some-area/some-feature"
   namespace := "some-namespace"
   // ... other variables or constants ...

   environment.Test(t,
      features.NewWithDescription(t.Name(), ...).
         WithLabel(LabelArea, ...).
         WithLabel(LabelSize, ...).
         WithLabel(config.LabelTestSuite, config.TestSuiteDefault).
         // ...
         WithSetup("ReadyPrerequisites", ...).
         // ... other setup steps ...
         AssessWithDescription("DoSomething", ...).
         AssessWithDescription("SomethingElseIsInSomeState", ...).
         // ... other assess steps ...
         WithTeardown("DeleteCreatedResources", ...).
         // ... other teardown steps ...
         Feature(),
   )
}

// ...
```

### Features' Labels

Features are grouped into broad feature areas - e.g. `TestComposition` in
`composition_test.go`. Features pertaining to Composition should be added to
`TestComposition`.

Some tests may involve updating an existing test - for example you might test a
new kind of transform by updating the `composition/patch-and-transform`
manifests and adding a new assessment or two to the `pandt` `features.Table`.

Other, larger tests may involve creating a new directory of manifests and a new
`features.Table`. Every `features.Table` must be passed to `environment.Test` to
be run.

When you pass a feature to `environment.Test` you can add arbitrary labels that
may be used to filter which tests are run. Common labels include:

* `area`: The area of Crossplane being tested - `pkg`, `apiextensions`, etc.
* `size`: `small` if the test completes in under a minute, otherwise `large`.

If you add a new `area` label, be sure to add it to the matrix strategy of the
e2e-tests job in the [CI GitHub workflow]. We run E2E tests for each area
of Crossplane in parallel.

When adding a test:

* Use commentary to explain what your tests should do.
* Use brief `CamelCase` test names, not descriptive sentences.
* Avoid adding complex logic in the `e2e` package.
* Implement new test logic as a `features.Func` in the `e2e/funcs` package.

## Design Principals

The goals of these tests are to:

* Simulate real-world use to exercise all of Crossplane's functionality.
* Run reliably, with no flaky tests.
* Converge on requiring mostly updated manifests - and little Go - to add tests.
* Use tools and patterns that are familiar and unsurprising to contributors.

The following design principals help achieve these goals:

* Use familiar Kubernetes YAML manifests as test fixtures.
* Provide a library of reusable test functions (e.g. `funcs.ResourcesCreatedIn`).
* Remain as close to idiomatic Go stdlib [`testing`] tests as possible.
* Use common, idiomatic Kubernetes ecosystem tooling - [`e2e-framework`].
* Implement as much _logic_ in Go as possible - avoid scripts or shelling out.

Refer to the [E2E one-pager] for more context.

[CI GitHub workflow]: ../../.github/workflows/ci.yml
[`testing`]: https://pkg.go.dev/testing
[`e2e-framework`]: https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework
[E2e one-pager]: ../../design/one-pager-e2e-tests.md
[`gotestsum`]: https://github.com/gotestyourself/gotestsum
